Source Path: nrn_docs_html/en/release-9.0/guide/index.html

Guides

What is NEURON
A flexible and powerful simulator of neurons and networks
Advantages over general-purpose simulators
Separates biology from purely computational concerns
Convenient user interface
User-extendable library of biophysical mechanisms
Enhancements for modeling networks
Customizable initialization and simulation flow control
Large user base
Development, support, and documentation
Availability and system requirements
References
How to get started with NEURON
Installation
Forum
Basic NEURON Usage
Using NMODL to add new mechanisms to NEURON
Biology Modeling FAQ
How do I work with neuron morphologies?
How do I simulate a current clamp pulse experiment?
How do I simulate a current clamp with non-pulse behavior?
How do I make cytosolic concentrations change in response to ion channel activity?
How do I make cytosolic concentrations diffuse and respond to ion channel activity?
Units used in NEURON
Scripting, the GUI, and the interpreter
Units within NMODL files
Using Session Files for Saving and Retrieving Windows
What is a session?
How (and when) to save all windows to a ses file, and how to retrieve them
How (and why) to save selected windows
The Window Group Manager
What’s in a ses file
What can go wrong, and how to fix it
Using the Cell Builder GUI
Creating a stylized (“stick-figure”) model cell
Managing a model cell with complex anatomy
Specifying parameterized variation of biophysical properties
Using the Import3D GUI
Overview of the Import3D tool
Reading a morphometric data file and converting it to a NEURON model
Exploring morphometric data and fixing problems
Network Builder tutorials
Using the Network Builder
Using NEURON’s Optimization Tools
Why is it called “Multiple Run Fitter,” and what does it really do?
Other optimization tools that work with NEURON
ModelView: Compact display of parameters for NEURON models
Randomness in NEURON models
How to generate independent random spike streams
Adapting MOD files for C++ with NEURON >= 9.0
Legacy patterns that are invalid C++
Legacy patterns that are considered deprecated
Legacy random number generators and API
Frequently asked questions (FAQ)
Now that I’ve installed NEURON, how do I run it?
What’s the best way to learn how to use NEURON?
How do I create a NEURON model?
Help! I’m having a hard time implementing models!
Why can’t NEURON read the text file (or
hoc
file) that I created?
How do I print a hard copy of a NEURON window?
How do I plot something other than membrane potential?
How do I save and edit figures?
I’ve used the NEURON Main Menu to construct and manage models. How can I save what I have done?
What is a ses (session) file? Can I edit it?
How do I use NEURON’s tools for electrotonic analysis?
Why should I use an odd value for nseg?
What’s a good stretegy for specifying nseg?
How do I change the background color used in NEURON’s shape plots and other graphs?
How do I change the color scale used in shape plots?
I see an error message that says … procedure too big in ./foo.hoc …
Where can I find examples of mod files?
How do I compile mod files?
I can’t get mod files to compile.
I installed a new version of NEURON, and now I see error messages like this: ‘mecanisms fooba needs to be re-translated. its version 5.2 “c” code is incompatible with this neuron version’.
Is there a list of functions that are built into NMODL?
Is there a list of functions that are built into hoc?
What units does NEURON use for current, concentration, etc.?
When I type a new value into a numeric field, it doesn’t seem to have any effect.
What is the difference between SEClamp and VClamp, and which should I use?
SEClamp and IClamp just deliver rectangular step waveforms. How can I make them produce an arbitrary waveform, e.g. something that I calculated or recorded from a real cell?
I just want a current clamp that will deliver a sequence of current pulses at regular intervals. Vector play seems like overkill for this.
I want a current clamp that will generate a pulse when I send it an event, or that I can use to produce pulses at precalculated times.
I have a set of recorded or calculated spike times. How can I use these to drive a postsynaptic mechanism?
How can I read data from a binary PClamp file?
How do I exit NEURON? I’m not using the GUI, and when I enter ^D at the oc> prompt it doesn’t do anything?
Is there a list of functions that are built into NEURON?